---
layout: post

title: Emergence Part 1
subtitle: Sense and Sensibility - Not the Jane Austen Novel
excerpt: We can never know the world directly. We are ultimately limited to our perception, and our perception, in turn, is limited by our senses.
---

{% include image.html url="/assets/img/evolution.webp" alt="Evolution" caption="Family Picture Time! Generated by ChatGPT" %}

We can never know the world directly. We are ultimately limited to our perception, and our perception, in turn, is limited by our senses. In the western world, you probably think of the five classical senses: taste, smell, hearing, sight, and touch. These are not exclusive to Greek philosophy; Buddhism includes these five (roughly) and adds a sixth: cognizance. Modern neurobiology, however, has discovered that even the simpler five classical senses are composed of numerous finer senses.

Taste, as many already know, can be broken down into salty, sweet, bitter, sour, and umami, each roughly corresponding to chemical functional groups, which react with receptors specific to that component to trigger the sense of taste. Smell, like taste, is also a chemical sense, but there are hundreds of unique receptors that allow us to differentiate a deep, rich variety of compounds with subtlety. Hearing starts in mechanical receptors but is interesting in that most of the information we perceive is derivative. Sight is mediated by rods, for sensing light and dark, and cones, for sensing red, green, and blue. Finally, touch is by far the most diverse of the classical senses, providing us a sense of our body position and movement (proprioception), vibration — with short, medium, and long periods — warmth and cold, pressure, stretch, pleasure, and pain (nociception), which itself has finer forms specific to different potential threats.

In a way, the sixth Buddhist sense has already been implicated through hearing and sight, since most — if not all — of the information we perceive from those systems is derived by the mind in the temporal and occipital lobes respectively; however, it’s traditionally considered to be where all the senses are delivered after a dedicated organ has produced its own sensory information outside the mind, as well as being the source of pain and pleasure. It’s definitely a superior conception of the senses over the Greek five, but neurobiology has shifted the boundaries where information originates or is processed, including the previously unaccounted sense of time produced by the aptly named temporal lobe.
## Sensory Origins Imagined

The neurons responsible for these senses arise at different times during prenatal development, each with their origins spanning our entire evolutionary lineage. It’s within this framing that I’ve found myself running through a thought experiment over and over again: if we could form memories of that time (and supposedly some do in later stages), what would it be like to go from a tiny little embryo all the way to a fully formed baby? And how did that develop over the iterations of our lineage from single-cell eukaryotes to these massive, multicellular amalgamations?
### Cellular Beginnings

I start by imagining myself first as a little eukaryotic cell, exclusively concerned with sensing chemical gradients to seek out nutrients and avoid threats. An abundance of sugars leaking from an apple scrap draw me closer to their source; as I consume the rare resource, I divide and grow to make the most of the opportunity, eventually depleting the sugars and proteins and replacing them with my own waste. It’s mostly carbonic acid and some amines, but amongst them, my specialized receptors detect acetic acid — an alien threat! Just as the sugars motivated me towards the source, this foreign acid motivates me in the opposite direction. My siblings and cousins who didn’t flee don’t seem to be around anymore…

As some threats adapt to take advantage of my family’s specific traits, we find that our mutated siblings who were stuck to each other actually provide one another with an advantage: we’re bigger than our predators and harder to eat! Those on the exterior are still under threat from pathogens, but they also have the backing and support of their inner peers, who meanwhile are protected from pathogens at the expense of relying on the exterior to provide them with nutrients. Some still die, but as a whole, we survive more easily than the individuals.
### Nerves

As the group becomes larger and larger, it gets difficult to coordinate, so some of us start specializing as messengers. When one side detects a threat, they can start flagellating, but it’s helpful if we don’t waste energy fighting against each other in the case that we’re threatened on opposite sides. The same could be said for trying to move towards any food we detect. By spending a little extra time and energy comparing our information internally, we can make an intelligent decision to work efficiently.
### Tidal Eating

At some point as we grow larger, it becomes difficult to supply everyone with nutrients by diffusion, which limits our thickness. We can limit the effect a little bit by circulating the nutrients around us by flapping and wiggling about a little bit, but this too has limits and can be energy intensive. If we could only direct the fluids more easily across our surface, we could transfer nutrients more efficiently. A divot forms in our aggregate and deepens until we have a small well in our mass. When we shrink around it, it forces fluid out, and when we relax, fluid returns, bringing fresh nutrients with it!
### One Way Eating

Eventually some of us form divots that penetrate our mass. Now we’re a little donut pre-worm — it’s more efficient because we can pass fluid in one direction, without wasting time waiting for new nutrients between intake cycles. Anytime our opening finds food, we excitedly notify as many as we can, and our messengers pass along the good news to anyone interested. Further down our length, some of our siblings start producing chemicals we use to break down prey to get ready for the bounty and extract nutrients as quickly as possible!
### Sight

Sometimes we find ourselves in voids where we don’t detect any signs of nutrients or prey. Some of our siblings sense something — not acids or nutrients — we don’t yet know what it means. Some follow, some avoid, but those who follow find an abundance of food to consume. This magical ability has untapped utility, and more and more of our siblings dedicate themselves to the sensation. They start conferring with one another and determining more precise signals — like we all did early on with our flagella — allowing us to detect prey over longer and longer distances, long before our chemical senses, which now become more important for deciding whether or not we consume an individual prey item.
### Chordates

Our highway of information is critical but vulnerable. We find that it’s useful to activate our ancient calcification abilities around our messengers to protect them, but at the same time, this rigid structure limits our mobility. Eventually, a “defect” prevents some from fully forming a calcified structure, but it has unexpected benefits. This new rigid yet segmented structure provides us with protection while also making it a little easier to move our otherwise squishy bodies.

Over time the priorities of the coordinators shapes our experience more than anything else. Now we becomes me. All the individual parts whose behavior was largely individual has become mediated at scale by a single cohort. “We” all participate, providing information and responding to commands, but “we” means less now than the aggregate “me”. (This alludes to a nefarious aspect of modern society, but that’s for another article…)
## Back to Being Human

Beyond this point, I don’t find it meaningful or helpful to imagine how developments might have occurred; fortunately, lots of research has been done on prenatal development to understand when major features develop in humans, which I’ll cover in the next part — much more scientifically based. After that we’ll get into machine analogs and how these stages might be implemented to bring AGI to life. Look forward to it!